Source URL: https://www.donhopkins.com/home/archive/visual-programming/bounce-notes.txt
Title: bounce-notes.txt

====

Discussion of Image/ine and Bounce.

====

From: Don Hopkins
Sent: Wednesday, September 20, 2000 9:47 PM
To: lev@shoko.calarts.edu
Subject: Image/ine plug-ins

Has anybody here written any plug-ins for image/ine? 
Is there an SDK for writing plug-ins, or any free example source code? 
 
I've written a bunch of cellular automata code that I've ported to
various frameworks, including a plug-in for AfterEffects on Mac and
Windows.  But as powerful as it is, AfterEffects isn't any good for
real time performance.  I've been running the same cellular automata
code in real time with DirectX under Windows, and now I want to port
the code over to the G4 Mac, in order to take advantage of the
PowerPC's AltiVec processor (Velocity Engine), and to capture and
process digital video with QuickTime.
 
I'm thinking of plugging my code into image/ine, but I am not
convinced that I will have a high enough level of control over it, as
I do in AfterEffects.  How are parameters passed in and out of
image/ine plug-ins, and manipulated over time?  Is there a way for
plug-ins to expose more complex data structures and functions, or a
way for them to provide special user interfaces for editing
parameters?
 
Several years ago, I plugged my cellular automata code into a visual
data flow programming language called Bounce (aka Body Electric, from
VPL).  Bounce plug-ins could define their inputs and outputs, giving
them names and types, and they could pop up control panels for
configuring themselves, so programmers could easily wire them together
with other components.
 
http://catalog.com/hopkins/lang/bounce/bounce.html
 
Bounce is similar to Max in many ways, but also quite different.  It's
more data flow oriented than control flow oriented, so it's like a
whole electrical circuit all running at once, with data flowing
between processing modules through wires, rather than control flow
(the program counter) jumping from module to module through wires,
like Max.  To implement conditionals, Bounce has a switching module
like a relay, with one output that switch between two inputs under
control of a third input; or you can enable and disable modules and
nested sub-modules, using an implicit "power" switch that turns
modules on and off.  To implement loops, it has a special nested
container that executes its contents repeatedly until it returns a
false value, but that was pretty unwieldy.
 
Several years ago, I was working with the Bounce source code on a
project at Interval Research.  I extended it to support plug-in data
processing modules through COM interfaces (aka ActiveX), and to allow
COM objects to travel along wires and be passed between data
processing modules like any other data type.  So it was possible to
extend Bounce by implementing your own new data types (like strings,
dictionaries, pones, or whatever) as COM objects, and then implement
plug-in data processing COM objects that could create and manipulate
those other new data types.  That is, we used COM to create the new
plug-in data types, as well as the plug-in components that processed
them.  Believe it or not, COM (now known as ActiveX, from Microsoft)
actually ran on the Mac in 1996, Internet Explorer uses it
extensively, and it doesn't suck.
 
I realize that image/ine is not trying to be a full fledged visual
programming language, but it would be nice to have a good way to pass
lots of different types of parameters back and forth between plug-ins,
like the way AfterEffects plug-ins can describe any number of inputs
and outputs of different (even custom) data types, and the user can
wire them together with "motion math", and the system automatically
handles the user interface for editing and keyframing the parameters
over time.
 
    -Don
 
====

A discussion of Bounce and other visual programming langauges, in
response to a question about the the availability of Bounce and Body
Electric:

====

From: Don Hopkins [mailto:xardox@mindspring.com] 
Sent: Saturday, September 23, 2000 5:55 PM
To: lev@shoko.calarts.edu
Subject: visual programming languages

[...]

The harsh reality is that the rights to Bounce and Body Electric are
totally locked up, and it's not available as a product, and probably
won't ever be.  

David Levitt legally acquired the rights to Body Electric when VPL
broke up, instead of money they owed him for Hookup (his own visual
programming language, that used the Macromedia Director M4 player
library (which years later evolved into Shockwave) as a 2D display
engine).  He named his version of Body Electric "Bounce", and
contracted me to help him develop it on the Mac. I worked on the user
interface, the Director engine, multimedia support, and plug-ins.

David went to Interval Research, and a few years later I went to work
with him again on a project using Bounce.  That was when I revisited
the plug-in system, using COM to support plug-in modules as well as
extensible datatypes.  

Interval Research just closed down a few months ago. But even if they
were still in business, they wouldn't release it, since they were just
using it for internal research projects, not trying to make a product
out of it.  

Sun Microsystems now has the rights to the VPL patents and the
original Body Electric, but they are being extremely tight about who
they let use Jaron Lanier's branch of the code.  For some bizarre
reason, Sun will only let Jaron give Body Electric out to six sites,
and no more.  He would love for other people to be able to use it, but
it doesn't look likely they'll let that happen.

My "ulterior motive" is to help create an open source visual
programming language, that borrows ideas from Bounce and many other
systems, including:

Hookup (David Levitt's midi data flow language he developed at MIT
Media Labs, before joining VPL and working on Body Electric).

Bounce (aka Body Electric, developed by Chuck Blanchard at VPL, extended by
Jaron Lanier, David Levitt and myself).

PSIBER (a visual PostScript programming environment for NeWS, the
source code I distributed for free, and wrote a paper about:

http://www.catalog.com/hopkins/psiber/psiber.html).

HyperLook (a graphical user interface programming environment for NeWS
written in PostScript):

http://www.catalog.com/hopkins/hyperlook/index.html).

SimAntics (the visual language for programming behaviors of people and
objects in The Sims; created in Edith, a tool that Maxis hasn't yet
released, but in which I do have a vested interest).

Several throw-away prototypes I wrote in NeWS, ScriptX, C++, and XML.
Max and jMax (commercially available and open source vpls).

Python (an excellent textual programming language that would be useful
for implementing a dynamic visual programming language).

Visual Basic (mainly its plug-in component system, aka COM or ActiveX;
not to imply that VB is really a vpl).

AfterEffects "Motion Math" (scripts used to wire up dependencies
between channels in Adobe AfterEffects).

ProGraph (another commercially available vpl that's been around for a
while).

RCX Code (Lego's vpl for programming the Lego Robotics brick sets with
motors and sensors).

MaxScript and MEL (extension languages for 3D environments 3D Studio
Max and Maya).

KidSim (aka Cocoa or Stagecraft Creator, a vpl for kids developed at
Apple).

ToonTalk (Ken Kahn's cartoon visual programming language for kids):

http://www.toontalk.com

Tinkertoy (executable graphics based on Lisp, by M Edel, described in
Nan C Shu's Visual Programming book).

LCSI Microworlds Logo, StarLogo, Object Logo, Multi Logo, and other
modern logo programming systems.

ThingLab (a graphical Smalltalk virtual environment from Xerox PARC).

The Incredible Machine and The Incredible Toons (Rube-Goldbergesque
virtual physics simulation contraption games).

SOAP (aka XML-RPC. Simple Object Access Protocol, that uses XML as a
remote procedure call protocol. Not a visual language per se, but
would be useful in a visual XML programming environment).

Turing Complete Cellular Automata (John von Neumann's self reproducing
cellular automata; Toffuli and Margolis's reversible billiard ball
automata that literally compute using smoke and mirrors).

Programming by Example or by Demonstration (KidSim enables kids to
program cellular automata rules by example; Photoshop "Actions").

====

A reply to Michael Theodore's query about Bounce availability.

====

From: "Don Hopkins" <xardox@mindspring.com>
To: "Michael Theodore" <michael.theodore@colorado.edu>
Sent: Thursday, September 21, 2000 8:47 AM
Subject: Re: Is Bounce available

I don't know what ever became of the branch of the code that I was
working on at Interval, but now Sun owns the patents and the rights to
the branch of the code that Jaron has, and they're being pretty tight
about it. Enclosed is the last exchange I had with Jaron about Body
Electric.

I am interested in writing something new from scratch, much better
than Bounce, based on xml and com, so you can implement plug-in data
types and components in java or any other language. Like a good lisp
environment, with a visual user interface, but using xml as the basic
data type for modeling data and code. 

That would be useful for implementing html template and macro
processors, real time multimedia web servers, xml-rpc (soap)
distributed object servers, hard core ai programming, and all kinds of
xml database queries and transformations, with the power of a
lisp-like functional programming language.

What do you think of jMax? I just downloaded and compiled it on Linux,
but can't get it to work. The server seems to crash but the interface
comes up (which is amazing, since the interface is the part that's
written in java). It uses TCL as an extension language, which is kind
of lame, but at least not activally disgusting like perl.

I was thinking of using Python to write an interpreter for a visual
programming language, since it has a lot of great tools for xml and
networking, a robust plug-in api, and excellent support for com on
Windows.

    -Don

====

A discussion between Don Hokins and Jaron Lanier about visual
programmign languages:

====

At 12:31 AM -0400 7/8/99, Hopkins, Don wrote:

Hi, Jaron. We've met briefly once or twice - I'm a friend of David
Levitt's.

What's this about Sun acquiring the rights to the VPL patents, and
Body Electric?

http://www.advanced.org/jaron/vpl.html

Does Sun actually have the Body Electric source code? What version do
they have?

Does anybody at Sun even know how to compile a Mac program?

Last time I worked there (admittedly a long time ago), they were too
embarrassed to allow Macs in the building (which might make somebody
realize how bad Unix sucks in comparison).

Has anyone tried to rewrite it in Java?


When I was working with David at Levity and Interval, I totally
overhauled the source code to Bounce: porting it to the latest version
of CodeWarrior and the PowerPC, cleaning up C code translated from
Pascal, that no human had ever touched before, and just generally
re-indenting and adding white space so it was pretty to look at.

Then I implemented a new interface for plugging in DM's, based on
ActiveX (yes, ActiveX runs on the Mac).  I added a new data type that
you can flow along blue wires: a COM object (aka a plug-in ActiveX
object in a shared library).  

Then we made plug-ins modules that produced and consumed the new
plug-in data types, like strings and polymorphic dictionaries.  With
these new data types, we were able to model very complex simulations
as nested trees of dictionaries, strings and numbers, treat
dictionaries as high level objects, pass them all around on wires,
reading and modifying them at will.

The thing that the original Body Electric was missing is a way to
dynamically model structured data like Lisp s-expressions and
association lists, which is now possible in Bounce, using
dictionaries. (The swivel3d trees just don't cut it for representing
"knowledge".)

Bounce still had the "M4" Director player rendering engine, but it
didn't do everything we needed, so I implemented my own graphics
library for drawing sprites, playing sounds, and stuff like that.  We
used it to implement a simulation of Rush Limbaugh and Jesse Jackson
watching TV and arguing over the closed captioning stream.

A big fat housefly would skitter around the screen, land on their
faces, and tickle them into waving their hands around and
pontificating.

I just got a 400 mhz G3 powerbook, and fired up a 2 year old copy of
Bounce and the crazy Limbaugh/Jackson demo, and it still works,
actually like a bat out of hell! I ran into David and John Szinger
(another Bounce programmer from Interval) a few days ago at a 4th of
July party, and they really got a kick out of seeing the old demo that
we worked together on, still running!

I live in Oakland just south of Berkeley. Drop me a line if you're in
the bay area, and would like to see what Bounce has evolved into.

    -Don

From: "Jaron Lanier" <jaron@advanced.org>
To: "Hopkins, Don" <DHopkins@maxis.com>
Sent: Thursday, July 08, 1999 6:13 AM
Subject: Re: Body Electric lives?

Hey there, and thanks for writing!

Yup, Sun owns VPL and Body Electric, and my guess is that if anyone
looked very closely it would turn out Interval doesn't have rights to
Bounce.  But no one is likely to look very closely, so let's forget
about that.  (I don't think Sun is aware of Bounce or the work at
Interval.)

I had never asked what was done with Bounce at Interval- it's
fascinating to hear what you were up to.  I live in NYC for the most
part, but I'd love to see it sometime when I'm in the Bay Area.  Also
Chuck Blanchard lives in SF and you and he might want to trade demos
sometime.

There IS a community of Body Electric users.  It is STILL building the
most interactive 3D virtual worlds of any tool (though Alice, from
Carnegie Mellon, is the other hot contender).  That's SHAMEFUL!  While
BE sucks in every other way, all the more recent vr design tools,
especially the vrml ones, simply avoid the problem of deep
interactivity. How could the community be so whimpy, at this late
date?

On the Body Electric side of things, there has also been some work
updating to CodeWarrior/PowerPC (shame we didn't share that work!), as
well as support for Quickdraw3D, OpenGL on the Mac, OMS, and some
other standards.

There have been some changes to the interface, but not as ambitious as
yours.  The neatest thing is a debugger/tracer tool that is a pleasure
to use.  Since BE is used mostly in 3D domain, there are also some
tools dealing with textures, lights, etc.

I had always thought the swivel tree was ridiculous, of course, but on
the other hand I liked the idea that the virtual world and the
knowledge base were the same thing- that unity encourages the
visibility and grabbability of the underlying concepts.  I think the
brain works that way- there isn't some barrier behind which everything
gets abstract- instead, it's user interface all the way to the bottom!
What I think would be the coolest long-term destination of BE would be
extending the scenegraph so that it was as powerful a knowledge base
as you'd want...

I'd LOVE to see a fancy BE release, in JAVA, or at least spitting JAVA
out.  The question, of course, is where the money would come from.
I've tried to talk Sun into an open source release so the community
could hack on it voluntarily (the source was included in the patents
that were granted, so it's actually already released by the US
government anyway, though only on paper).  Unfortunately, Sun doesn't
want to do that.  What they've said instead is that I can choose up to
six sites with free hacking privileges at a given time.  Bizarre!
With so few sites, I think there'd need to be money to make sure the
sites stayed focused on it...  You'd have thought Sun would know
better by now.

The body electric community is surprisingly NOT entertainment
oriented, though I and a few others still use it that way.  There are
people hidden away who are still using it for ergonomic simulations,
simple surgical planners (because the fancy systems are too rigid to
model some situations), cognitive test rigs, and some work with kids.

You should know there was some tension about BE/Bounce at one point.
The problem was that Chuck Blanchard wasn't credited as the lead
designer/programmer of BE/Bounce when David brought the program to
Interval.  Chuck's name was reduced in stature in the "about" and he
was not mentioned in some important semi-public demos at Interval.  He
was also offered a pseudo-position to help with Bounce at Interval,
but without health benefits - and Chuck has MS and absolutely NEEDS
health insurance.  I at one point yelled at the guy who runs Interval
(forgot his name..)  about their treatment of Chuck- and David is
STILL mad at me for making a fuss about it.  But I felt I had to.

So that's the scoop!  Both sides of the mystery revealed!

All the best,

Jaron

Jaron the web: www.advanced.org/jaron

====

From: Hopkins, Don [mailto:Hopkins, Don] 
Sent: Monday, April 06, 1998 5:47 PM
To: 'm k prasanna'
Cc: Hopkins, Don
Subject: RE: A Tale of Two SimCities

A good book about Microworlds was written by one of the Unibomber's
victims (who survived), David Gelertner, called "Mirror Worlds". He
talks about making micro-worlds in the computer that mirror and
complement the real world. The buzzword "microworlds" also refers to a
dead end explored in AI research, with programs like "SHRDLU", that
could figure out how to solve problems in an extremely simplified
"microworld", but don't generally scale up to dealing with real-world
situations. That was the same wall that "expert systems" hit, when you
start applying them to the real world, they become too complex and
fragile to manage, and don't scale up.

Agentsheets is a visual programming language that makes it possible to
program graphically by example.  There are a lot of different visual
programming languages, each good for different kinds of applications.
This one is useful for programming simcity-like behavior with tiles.
They didn't implement the actual game in its entirety, but their
langauge makes it easy to program certain behaviors like drawing roads
that conduct traffic and wires that conduct electricity, and
programming the behavior of traffic on the roads, etc.

SimCity is essentially tile based, like a cellular automata, with a
bunch of other programming techniques thrown in. The real SimCity is
not programmed by example, it's just a bunch of C code. You can
specify a pure cellular automata rule by example, with graphical
rewrite rules, by giving an example of an initial cell configuration
(like a road with a car on it), and an example of the next
configuration in time, that the original configuration should be
replaced with (the car moved to the next tile in front of it). Then
you could specify a bunch more examples to show it how to turn the car
around a corner, etc. There's a whole field of research called
"programming by example" or "programming by demonstration" (Brad Myers
has a good book on it called "Watch what I do: programming by
demonstration".  Henry Lieberman has a good web page about the
subject.

http://lieber.www.media.mit.edu/people/lieber/PBE/Learn-About.html

There are all kinds of languages that support "programming by
demonstration", and a lot of them are graphical, like AgentSheets, but
not all.

Somebody made a text editor that you could give it a "before and
after" example of how to edit some text (like capitalize the first
word and put a period at the end), and it would abstract it into a
program that it could repeatedly apply to other text.

Spreadsheets like Excel are visual languages (in that they operate on
a two dimensional grid that's displayed on the screen in real time),
that support programming by example (by recording macros, that you can
render as visual basic code). A spreadsheet is kind of like a cellular
automata, but each cell can have its own rule that relates it to its
neighbors. A true cellular automata has only one consistant rule
that's applied to every cell. In a system like AgentSheets, that rule
is the combination of all the examples you've supplied. So it doesn't
matter which cell a road or a car is in, the same rules apply
uniformly everywhere. Rewrite rules can have wildcards in them so they
are more abstract and apply to more situations.

Check out KidSim, now known as Cocoa, that was developed at Apple.
It's a visual programming by example language for kids, that's tile
based, and kids can use to program certain kinds of games and
simulations.  Search around on www.apple.com for kidsim or cocoa, and
you'll find all kinds of stuff about it.

Also Maxis has a product called "Klik and Play, the Revolutionary
Instant Game Creator", that lets kids design games, that comes with a
bunch of pre-made games they can play, edit, learn from, and
canibalize to make their own games. It's kind of old, and didn't sell
very well, so I couldn't find it on the Maxis web site, but a search
on the web and dejanews would probably turn up some interesting stuff.

The basic idea these things are trying to get at, is that it should be
possible for "end users" (a horrible term) or "non-programmers" to
program the computer, at a high level, and to be able to understand
and modify programs that other people have written. Some of these
goals are at odds with each other, or self contradictory. Graphical
languages are easy to understand visually, but difficult to input and
edit. It's easier for a novice to use a text editor than something
like Adobe Illustrator. Programs can be graphically represented, but
there needs to be a good way to input the programs, better than
drawing them.

That's where programming by demonstration fits in -- at the low end,
recording macros in a program like Excel, where the user does stuff
the usual way by selecting cells and clicking on buttons and picking
from menus, while recording a macro that can be played back. And at
the high end, like KidSim, where the program is represented very
graphically, with lots of icons and boxes and arrows, etc.

Programs like Debabelizer and Photoshop allow you to perform image
processing operations on an example image, that are recorded as a
series of instructions, that you can go back and edit and change the
parameters, and play back on whole batches of images en masse.

"Visual programming" and "programming by example" try to simplify the
task of programming, by limiting the domain, or inventing graphical
representations and user interfaces to represent code. Sometimes
they're unsuccessful because they are unwieldy, use way too much
screen real-estate, look butt-ugly, or require tedious navagation to
understand the program (scrolling over vast areas, flipping through
piles of windows, sorting out tangles of wires, or worse yet 3D visual
programming languages requiring you to roll / pitch / yaw / translate
/ scale into just the right place to look at a part of your program).

The more successful languages limit themselves to a particular domain
(like tile based games, or image processing), and have specialized
constructs that make them less general purpose but more appropriate to
the task at hand (like support for animating sprites and collision
detection, in klik-and-play).

		-Don

====

From:	       John Bates [SMTP:johnbates@iname.com]
Sent:	       Wednesday, March 25, 1998 5:59 PM
To:	       don@toad.com
Subject:      About Bounce

Hi I was just following some links on the WWW about Bounce, HookUp and
Body Electric and I seem to have come to a dead end. I saw your Bounce
stuff on your homepage and I am wondering if you knew what happened to
Bounce or HookUp. Is there any way I could get more info on these 2
languages/IDEs Thanks

John Bates
Melbourne, Australia

====

From: Hopkins, Don [mailto:Hopkins, Don] 
Sent: Monday, April 13, 1998 12:58 PM
To: 'John Bates'
Subject: RE: About Bounce

Hi John. Thanks for your interest!

Hookup is an old product from Hip Software, which was absorbed by VPL
(the people who made the data glove), when David Levitt (proprietor of
Hip) went to work for VPL. He took the ideas and integrated some of
them into Body Electric, which was a visual programming langauge that
Chuck Blanchard had developed at VPL in Pascal, At some time it got
converted to C through some automatic translator on an HP unix
system. It worked over the network with a renderer called "Isaac" that
displayed 3d trees, which Body Electric could articulate (twist
around, translate, hide, etc). The 3d trees were stored in Swivel 3D
format, which is a 3D editor that ran on the Mac.  You would attach
geometry to the trees on the SGI and move them around by visually
programming the Mac.  The nice thing was that the simulation ran while
you were editing it, so programming was very interactive, like
soldering on a live circuit, or defusing an atomic bomb. When VPL
closed down, David got the rights to Body Electric, renamed it
"Bounce" and further developed it by adding the Macromedia Director
display engine (the Director file player, plug-in kind of like an
early version of Shockwave). Interval Research, where David works, now
has the rights to Bounce. I've worked on Bounce and other stuff for
David and for Interval.  They're just using it in research projects,
which it's just great for, but they're not going to actually develop
Bounce into a product.

If you're looking for a product you can use, there are several good
ones out there.  I've seen neat stuff done in ProGraph and LabView.
Bounce was fairly specialized, but you will probably find some good
general purpose commercial VPL's to suit your needs.

	   -Don

====

From:	      Rajat K. Paharia [SMTP:rajat@cs.stanford.edu]
Sent:	      Monday, August 24, 1998 10:51 PM
To:	      Hopkins, Don
Subject:      RE: Pie Menus

Hey Don -

Thanks for the pointers. Sorry for the delay in responding - been sick
as a dog.

> how big its virtual area is. You might follow his argument to the
> logical conclusion and put menu bars along all four edges of the
> screen.  I know you can move the Windows task bar around to any edge
> you want, but I don't know if you can have four of them on different
> edges at once (but it might be worth hacking that up)!

Interesting idea. If they could all Auto-Hide people might actually
use them, since a lot of people don't like giving up the extra real
estate. I know that when you install Office it gives you another
toolbar (that has multiple "tabs", so it's several virtual toolbars),
so a lot have two already.

> Graphical user interfaces that were designed when larger screens
> were available (like Windows and Open Look) tend to put a separate
> "menu bar" up at the top of each window. Not only is it closer to
> the mouse, but it can

My first computers were Apples (IIe, Mac128k). Now whenever I use a
Mac, I get very frustrated very fast - mostly because I can never tell
what application that I'm currently in and that the Menu Bar is
related to.

Have you tried out the ActiveX Pie menus in VB yet? If not, I can also
use IE/VBScript as a development environment.

So I read on your web page that you hooked Body Electric up to
Director for David Levitt. Very cool. I was an intern at VPL in early
1992 and I did a bunch of BE programming for demos and stuff and met
David (and Chuck and the rest) there, although I doubt he remembers
me. For years afterwards I would show BE to people as an example of a
really interesting Visual programming/Dataflow language.

Ted says "Hello!" and "Don? He's a great guy!"

What are you doing at Maxis?

The Avengers is the WORST movie I've seen in years. avoid at all
costs. Even Uma in skin-tight leather doesn't make it worth it.

Out of Sight, Something about Mary, and Pi are all excellent.

Read much Sci Fi?

- rajat

====

From: Hopkins, Don [mailto:Hopkins, Don] 
Sent: Monday, August 24, 1998 11:49 PM
To: 'Rajat K. Paharia'
Cc: dhopkins@maxis.com
Subject: RE: Pie Menus

Wow, you programmed Body Electric? 

I worked for David Levitt's own company on Bounce (what he called his
version of BE), and then worked on it a lot more with him at
Interval. I cleaned up the code and ported it to the PPC, then
integrated it with the Mac version of COM (ActiveX), so you could have
plug-in modules that emited and consumed plug-in COM data types on the
wires (like strings, dictionaries, and multimedia data types like
images).

We used it for some weird research projects, kind of like Bounce's
last gasp before we moved onto the Windows platform. The end result
was an animated argument between Jesse Jackson and Rush Limbaugh about
what they were watching on TV. I sure hope the results of that
"research simulation" never see the light of day! :-)

You might want to check out the DirectShow filter graph stuff that
Microsoft's come out with for processing multimedia streams. It's part
of the "DirectX Media SDK".  No real programming mechanisms, so it's
not a language, but it is a very interesting multimedia data flow
system, that would be nice to program with a higher level visual
language. They have a rudimentary "filter graph editor", but no data
types like integers and booleans, and no control constructs like
loops, ifs, relays, etc. But you could probably design that kind of
stuff and plug it in via COM. Somebody should use Microsoft's plug-in
scripting engine interface, to build a visual programming language,
that lets you program multimedia data flow graphs like Bounce, using
all kinds of COM components. I'd love to be able to have XML data
flowing on the wires. There's already at least one COM interface to
XML... Imagine writing visual data flow graphs that sucked up xml and
multimedia data and literally flowed it out into web pages using the
document object model. Or whatever.

I just fixed a few bugs that pie menus had interoperating with visual
basic, since we last emailed.  I will test it again and make sure
nothing's horribly broken, and then make a distribution you can use!

My favorite sf authors are Phillip K Dick and Stanislaw Lem. I am a
hard core Dick Head.  Lem wrote the story that inspired SimCity, about
a couple of constructor robots who made a tiny simulated city for a
deposed despot to rule over.

I'm working with Will Wright (who designed SimCity) on a game called
"The Sims", kind of like a dollhouse that you build, furnish with
stuff, and populate with simulated people. I did the 3d body animation
system (quaternion interpolation kind of like a multi track sound
mixer, with a 4 dimensional rotation track per bone). And I'm working
on the content pipeline from 3d studio max (so artists can author 3d
graphics and animation, and export them into the game), the walking
engine (to sequence and blend those animations to get the guy to walk
across the room, turn corners, etc), architecture tools (drawing walls
and floors, putting wallpaper doors and windows on the walls, moving
objects around, etc), and anything else that needs to be done.

    -Don

====

